READemption - A RNA-Seq Analysis Pipeline 
*****************************************
Table of content
================

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1

   installation
   live_and_installation_image
   docker_image
   subcommands
   example_analysis
   troubleshooting
   license
   versions	      

READemption in a nutshell
=========================

READemption is a pipeline for the computational evaluation of
RNA-Seq data. It was originally developed to process dRNA-Seq reads
(as introduced by Sharma et al., Nature, 2010 (`Pubmed
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20164839>`_)) originating from
bacterial samples. Meanwhile is has been extended to process data
generated in different experimental setups and from all domains of
life. The `functions <subcommands.html>`_ which are accessible via a
command-line interface cover read processing and aligning, coverage
calculation, gene expression quantification, differential gene
expression analysis as well as visualization. In order to set up and
perform analyses quickly READemption follows the principal of
*convention over configuration*: Once the input files are
copied/linked into defined folders no further parameters have to be
given. Still, READemption's behavior can be adapted to specific needs
of the user by parameters.

Download
========

READemption can be download from `its PyPI page
<https://pypi.python.org/pypi/READemption/>`_. Please read the
`installation instructions <installation.html>`_.

Source code
===========

The source code of READemption can be found at https://github.com/konrad/READemption.

Cite
====

If you apply READemption in your data analysis please cite the
following publication: *READemption – A tool for the computational
analysis of deep-sequencing-based transcriptome data*.
Konrad U. Förstner, Jörg Vogel, Cynthia M. Sharma. 2014,
Bioinformatics, Aug 13. `Fulltext
<http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/content/30/23/3421>`_,
`Pre-print at bioRxiv
<http://biorxiv.org/content/early/2014/05/19/003723>`_.

Contact
=======

For question and requests feel free to contact `Konrad Förstner
<http://konrad.foerstner.org/>`_ <konrad.foerstner@uni-wuerzburg.de>
